hi everyone and welcome back to part
five in our little CHP ten-year
anniversary special program laws la
Montgomery here let's get right on it we
left off last time with kissinger's trip
recap memo where he briefed his boss
Richard M Nixon and all the points
discussed at the secret meeting held in
Beijing with Joanne lie between July 9
to 11 1971 in picking up where we left
off Kissinger had some rather
interesting things to say to Nixon about
Japan in his memo he had written quote
Jo repeatedly expressed concern about
the revival of Japanese militarism and I
have no doubt that the PRC relationship
with Japan is in fact a serious matter
for the Chinese Jo maintained that the
rapid development of Japanese economic
power would inevitably carry rearmament
in its wake in this he said that Japan's
economic expansion would lead to
political expansionism and he pointed to
the great budgetary increase of Japan's
fourth defence plan over its
predecessors as case in point he quoted
Sato as mentioning that Japan's rapid
economic growth would permit this plan
to be completed in two to three years
rather than the 5 originally
contemplated end quote Korea plus the
complicated india-pakistan relationship
were also hot topics that Kissinger
briefed Nixon on regarding India
Kissinger concluded his memo with this
remark quote the Chinese detestation of
the Indians came through loud and clear
conversely China's warm friendship
ferred Pakistan as a firm and reliable
friend was also made very plain the
lesson that Jo may have been trying to
make here was that those who stand by
China and keep their word will be
treated in kind and quote this quote
from dr. Kissinger's memo
really resonates today and was worth a
mention this was with concern to Jo and
lies thoughts regarding great power
relations listen carefully it went this
way quote Jo professed apprehension over
the possibility that the u.s. you
SSR Japan and even India might
collaborate to curve up China
he showed deep bitterness about the
Soviets and contempt for their petty
tactics the Soviets he said were
proceeding down the u.s. Road and
spreading their hands out too far while
he was confident that they would be
ultimately defeated he inferred that
difficult times might be expected before
this came about Joe several times
emphasized that China lacked the
economic base to be considered a great
power but had no desire to be considered
one and indeed wish to avoid the kind of
great power rivalry existing between the
Soviet Union and the u.s. Joe alleged
that even after China's economy became
developed it would still not act as a
great power
the Chinese clearly like to picture
themselves as free from the vise of
great power ambitions which have only
served to stir turmoil in the world and
brought problems for the powers
themselves they prefer to be cast in the
role of championing the less powerful
unfortunate countries of the world their
attitude towards great powers now is a
mix of hostility suspicions and fear
this may be rather disingenuous however
for while they profess not to envy those
who are indisputably great powers they
may be making a virtue out of a
necessity and their very interest in a
us-china summit has them playing a great
power game end quote
how prophetic to hear those words from
1972 in this early summer of 2020 let me
just quote one more excerpt from Henry
Kissinger's memo in which he tried to
encapsulate the essence of the meeting
and the future Nixon visit to China
quote I am Frank to say that this visit
was a very moving experience the
historic aspects of the occasion the
warmth and dignity of the Chinese the
splendor of the Forbidden City Chinese
history and culture the heroic stature
of Joanne Lai and the intensity and
sweep of our tasks combined to make an
indelible impression on me and my
colleagues these 48 hours and my
extensive discussions with Joe in
particular had all the flavor texture
variety and delicacy of a Chinese
banquet prepared from the long sweep of
tradition and culture meticulously
cooked by hands of experience and served
and splendidly simple surroundings our
feast consisted of many courses some
sweet and some sour all interrelated and
forming a coherent whole it was a total
experience and one went away as after
all good Chinese meals very satisfied
but not at all satiated we have laid the
groundwork for you and Mao to turn a
page in history but we should have no
illusions about the future profound
differences and years of isolation yawn
between us and the Chinese they will be
tough before and during the summit on
the question of Taiwan and other major
issues and they will prove implacable
foes if our relations turn sour my
assessment of these people is that they
are deeply ideological close to fanatic
and the intensity of their beliefs at
the same time they display an inward
security that allows them within the
framework of their principles to be
meticulous and reliable in dealing with
others furthermore the process we have
now started will send enormous
shockwaves around the world it may panic
the Soviet Union into sharp hostility it
could shake Japan loose from its heavily
American moorings it will cause a phial
and upheaval in Taiwan it will have a
major impact on our other Asian allies
such as Korea and Thailand it will
increase the already substantial
hostility in India some quarters may
seek to sabotage the summit over the
coming months
however we were well aware of these
risks when we embarked on this course we
were aware too that the alternative was
unacceptable continued isolation from
one
order of the world's most talented
people and a country rich in past
achievements and future potential with
Japan our task will be to make clear
that we are not shifting our allegiance
in Asia from her to China on Taiwan we
can hope for a little more than damage
limitation by reaffirming our diplomatic
relations and mutual defense treaty even
while it becomes evident that we foresee
a political evolution over the coming
years with our other Asian allies we
will need to stress both our continued
bonds and our hopes that reconciliation
between US and the Chinese will serve
the cause of regional peace and in India
after the initial shock our China moves
might produce a more healthy
relationship for Asia and for the world
we need to demonstrate that we are
enlarging the scope of our diplomacy in
a way that far from harming the
interests of other countries should
instead prove helpful to them in our
dealings with both the Chinese and
others will require reliability
precision and finesse if we can master
this process we will have made a
revolution end quote so two days after
Kissinger briefed Nixon at a San
Clemente home reviewing all these points
from his trip recap memo on July 15th at
7:45 p.m. in Los Angeles Nixon spoke
from NBC's Burbank studios
he gave a seven-minute address to
discuss what the American people quote a
major development in our efforts to
build a lasting peace in the world he
laid it all out to the American people
and to say it was a bombshell of a story
was quite an understatement
you can imagine how the Russians felt
about all this none of it was good for
them and they felt the pressure
immediately suddenly after months and
months of obfuscating a date was set for
a Nixon Brezhnev summit in May 1972 this
had struck the exact raw nerve that both
the US and China expected it to on July
25th 1971
ran a story that stated quote any
schemes to use the contacts between
Beijing and Washington for some pressure
on the Soviet Union there are nothing
but the result of a loss of touch with
reality end quote
yeah they were feeling it nonetheless
not even a week later in an article in
the party rag home.she magazine the CCP
stated that the whole reasoning behind
this meeting with the US was that China
had to ally itself with its quote
secondary enemy the United States in
order to quote isolate and strike at its
primary enemy the Soviet Union and it's
a little bit aside drama to everything
going on at this time politically and
geopolitically well in BO mouth
second-in-command and chosen successor
launched a botched coup d'etat and a
failed assassination attempt on Mao in
September of 1971 just two months after
Nixon's dramatic announcement the
Chinese kept his Lin Biao matter under
tight wraps and Outsiders could only
speculate what actually happened even
today almost a half a century later
let's just say details are sketchy this
act was unprecedented in PRC history and
nothing like this has happened since
it's been said that Lin pio launched
this coup attempt in response to miles
proposed opening to the u.s. not
everyone in China was in favor of making
friends with Uncle Sam but in 1971
halfway through the Cultural Revolution
there was only one single voice in China
that mattered and he wanted to keep
going with this idea a month after the
Lin Biao incident Kissinger flew back to
Beijing a second time to personally take
part in laying the groundwork for the
presidential visit seeing as how the
secret was already out there was no need
to sneak into Beijing via Pakistan this
time there were two things at stake for
the u.s. that depended on the success of
the plan 1972 visit to China by Nixon
first was the u.s. so
sumit and ii was negotiating an end to
the Vietnam War the tension from the
lianbao incident was still in the air
when Kissinger landed in October 1971
the communique that contained all that
details both sides needed to agree on
and it still wasn't finalized and
putting this all important document to
bed was the main reason for kissinger
second trip not to mention the whole
visit of Nixon to China it had to get
done but they were already pretty close
all the while since August 1971
Secretary of State William Rogers was
fighting the good fight in the UN to
keep the Taiwan government in you might
say like those whose proclivities leaned
in the direction of Taiwan and the KMT
government he was trying to have his
cake and eat it too on the one hand
giving in to the reality that there was
too much momentum in the normalization
process with the PRC and allowing that
government to take over the China seat
at the UN but on the other hand in 1971
the memories of flying tigers and the
whole gamut of goodwill that had been
built up between young and the Americans
going back to the 1920s it was too hard
to let go no matter how you sliced it
the US was cut in Taiwan loose Rogers
and plenty of others George Herbert
Walker Bush as well our 41st president
they tried so hard to hang on to their
friends the US negotiators fought to the
very end to give Taiwan the best deal
possible which as it turned out didn't
amount to much where Taiwan was
concerned at this moment in history Joe
and Lai was in the driver's seat
Nixon surely knew as early as 1968 or 69
it was going to all boil down to this in
the end and that it did a lot of
politicians not to mention plenty of
American people were devastated to watch
this happen
Kissinger held immense
the substance of talks with Joe during
this second tete-a-tete that transpired
between October 20th and 26th 1971
during the initial meeting held in the
late afternoon of October 20th Joe once
again invited Kissinger to speak first
and Kissinger used this opportunity to
present the general position of the
United States with regard to the matter
of restoring relations and once again
these words still resonate in these
present cantankerous times he said quote
we are of course aware that our two
countries represent different
philosophical views we recognize also as
the Prime Minister so eloquently pointed
out to a visiting journalist that the
People's Republic does not trade in
principles in neither do we nevertheless
we believe that the People's Republic
and the United States have many
congruent interests it is no accident
that our two countries have such a long
history of friendship we believe that
peace in Asia and peace in the world
requires your full participation we will
not participate in arrangements that
affect your interest without involving
you we do not accept the proposition
that one country can speak for all
socialist countries we believe there is
really but one issue that divides us
which is in itself the product of
history if we can take account of each
other's concerns on this problem if we
can agree on both a general direction
and a process of resolution as I think
we can then there will remain no
fundamental obstacle to our relations
this is the attitude that determines
President Nixon's actions mr. prime
minister when we met in July you said
that the announcement of President
Nixon's visit to China would shake the
world well the world has been shaken our
two countries have set in motion new
currents and for many nations a whole
new set of considerations arises when
they conduct foreign policy we have
started a revolution and world affairs
but as you mr. Prime Minister know
better than we it is the essence of any
revolution that for a while
the old coexists with the new I think we
must sort out those questions which can
be solved immediately those which can be
agreed in principle but take time to
implement and those that must be left to
longer processes end quote
having already aired their most
overriding concerns and having already
laid the groundwork and the secret July
visit this second meeting was much more
specific and what was to be agreed upon
once Nixon flew into town a date for
which had not yet been nailed down
and his opening remarks Kissinger added
quote the major issues of course are
those we discussed last time of which we
understand and recognize that the most
important for you is the issue of Taiwan
in addition we discussed Indochina
relations with other countries such as
the Soviet Union and Japan South Asia
especially the india-pakistan dispute
which we believe is taking very ominous
turns Korea and some issues on arms
control week a shape and agenda for the
president's visit reach mutual
understandings on what we might agree to
say and do and perhaps begin shaping the
outlines of a communique end quote
the next morning October 21st the talks
continued at the Great Hall of the
People Mao and Nixon had both been
briefed on the initial meeting and the
content of the discussions after laying
out the broad strokes now came the
moment to work out the details
where the devil often dwells with the
main topics slated for the morning being
Nixon's visit Taiwan and Japan it was
sure not to be a light-hearted chat the
start date for Nixon's visit was agreed
to be February 21st four months to the
date that they were having this
discussion specific details regarding
whether the Nixon visit with last five
or seven days remained Kissinger first
warned Jo and ly that this presidential
visit while China was going to get an
adult dosage of all the hoopla and
everything that entails a US
presidential visit to all the complex
technical details matters
of communications security protocol and
everything that was going to happen to
get the whole shebang televised and
recorded for posterity and broadcast all
over the world China 1971 was a far cry
from what it is today and for the main
event the meeting between Nixon and Mao
careful attention was paid to this
matter as both sides knew how important
that handshake photo-op and discussion
was going to be a lot was riding on that
moments when it came and no detail could
be left unconsidered they agreed that
the meeting should be early on the
second or third day Kissinger didn't
know it yet but whether this climactic
moment happened or not depended entirely
on the health of Mao by 1971 Mao was
suffering from a whole heck of a lot of
physical maladies and no one could say
with any degree of certainty when Mao
would be in the condition to meet Nixon
or if he'd even be alive when the time
came the Chinese talked as if this was
no problem but mouths condition was
never a sure thing from day to day
there was nothing Joe and I or anyone
could do except put on their best face
and adopt a wait-and-see attitude these
discussions between Kissinger and Joe
contained all the substance over these
five days in October these two men both
very good at their jobs hammered out the
final details that both leaders Nixon
and Mao would later give their assent to
every one of these momentous topics all
of such profound regional and global
importance look Joe and Kissinger
expounded on all the possible merits of
their respective positions and both
sides debated each point down to the
minutest detail the objective was to
nail down this communique this document
would contain all the fine print about
the way it was going to be from now on
so it was paramount to get this matter
put to bed before Air Force one landed
for this date with destiny both sides
were very well aware
that there was no sense for Richard
Nixon to fly all the way to China and
shake mouths and if there was nothing
agreed to in advance as the draft for
the communique was slowly hammered out
each side painstakingly reviewed every
word and how every possible meaning of
each word might be construed by the
people of their respective countries and
before the whole world these were all
weighty topics that even in our day
still resonate amongst the peoples of
China the US and the other people with
whom China and the US had mutual
concerns and interests which I guess is
pretty much everybody with regard to
Taiwan though much had been agreed to
much also remain to be finalized it was
one thing to agree on a diplomatic
solution but no matter how much merit
the agreed-upon points had they still
had to pass through the court of public
opinion both in China and the u.s. in
this respect both sides knew their side
well but not so much the potential
impact it would have on the feelings
amongst their other respective peoples
they knew how to play to their crowd Jo
and ly knew what the Chinese people
wanted to hear let me quote from the
transcripts how deftly Henry Kissinger
was able to put it quote I believe also
that the formulations with respect to
Taiwan go further than it would be
possible for us to say on this visit so
what I would like to propose to the
Prime Minister is the following I
believe that if this communique were
published in this form the impact on the
United States would be exactly the
opposite of what you intend all of those
who have sought improved relations with
the People's Republic will be
discredited because it will be said that
the president came 12,000 miles in order
to be asked to sign a document
containing the sharpest possible
formulations against United States
policy there must be some way of
expressing your principles which also
maintains the self-respect of the
American leaders this problem is less
acute than the section on general
principles in which there are only two
or three sentences that can be
considered offensive but it is acute in
the specifics
one other point it isn't possible to
refer to understandings in a public
communique we'll be spending the next
two years explaining what the
understandings were with respect to our
understandings you have to rely on us to
be farsighted it is not in our interest
to try to trick you and if we try to
trick you you'll find out very quickly
and everything we are trying to do will
be destroyed
we do not have to settle our differences
indeed we cannot on this visit or maybe
ever but we do have to indicate that the
visit marked some significant new
beginning or why else is it taking place
we must be able to answer the question
of exactly what was accomplished and
what was accomplished cannot be only
things that we must do in response to
Chinese demands there are many forces on
the right and curiously enough also on
the pro-soviet left and the pro India
liberal side who would like nothing
better than if this visit can end
without any tangible progress either in
mood or in content end quote
if you're wondering gee everything
seemed to be going so well what happened
that made Henry Kissinger give such a
pitch to Joanne Lai well in the middle
of the discussions with both sides
believing the communique was almost a
done deal
Mao had second thoughts Mao told Jo he
had to make sure the communique spelled
out China's position with regard to
communist orthodoxy and all that that
meant and he said he wasn't backing down
from this and the Americans were welcome
to state their view as they chose these
were mouths principles and seeing that
the communique didn't contain any
wording that attested to this well he
strongly disparaged the document and
everyone on the Chinese side had to
scramble to make it more in line with
something you'd expect Chairman Mao to
say one of Mao's most basic principles
was that peace could emerge only out of
struggle not as an end in itself Henry
Kissinger later said of Mao sudden
change of heart quote he put forward a
draft communique that stated the Chinese
position
in uncompromising language it left blank
pages for art position which was
expected to be comparably strong to the
contrary there was a final section for
common positions at first I was taken
aback but as I reflected the unorthodox
format appeared to solve both sides
problem each could reaffirm its
fundamental convictions which would
reassure domestic audiences and uneasy
allies the differences had been known
for decades the contrast would highlight
the agreements being reached and the
positive conclusions would be far more
credible and quote
so with Mao placated on this point they
all dodged a bullet so to speak and with
that let's close up shop roll down the
shutters lock the gate for now next
episode we'll finish up Kissinger's
October visit if you made it this far
and I don't see why you wouldn't thanks
for listening this is Laszlo Montgomery
signing off from Los Angeles California
hoping against hope that you will drop
everything you're doing when the time
comes and join me next time for another
exciting episode of that China history
podcast a ten-year anniversary edition
if I do say so myself take care everyone